# Grove - visual code editor and macro system

(An idea whose time has come -- since 1980)

## Visual code editing

Grove is visual source code editor. It is not a text editor.  Instead,
a source file is parsed into a syntax tree which is shown for viewing
and editing. Each tree node is its own object supporting direct
manipulation with keyboard and mouse.

A structural representation provides many major benefits over text. It
can be customized with themes and augmented with tools such as live
code evaluation and completion (and these tools will be vastly easier
to make because they don't need to parse code). The editor can easily
help the user by presenting the available language constructs at each
point and explaining what they do. Identifier names can contain
spaces.  Special characters don't need to be escaped, hence literal
strings will be easier to read and write. Syntax errors cannot be
made.  Tabs-vs-spaces and whitespace-vs-braces debates can be put to
rest. Everyone can use the theme they personally prefer. For visually
impaired people, it will be easier to craft interfaces tailored to
their needs, since the interface will have an easier time analyzing
the code and unlimited ways to present it.

The main disadvantage of a structural representation is that it's not
clear how to make it intuitive to work with incomplete ideas. We will
have to tackle this problem experimentally, modifying the user
interface until it is pleasant to use.

## Interoperating with text files

For compatibility, Grove saves source code in conventional text files
using the traditional syntax of each programming language. Grove can
only open syntactically correct files. When saving code, it formats
the entire source file according to a particular style (e.g. for C
code, it indents using a set number of spaces and aligns all the
opening braces in a particular way). It does not preserve formatting
in the original file that differs from this style. Therefore Grove is
only practical for working on projects that use an automatic code
formatter (such as clang-format) to strictly follow a coding
style. Fortunately, that's getting to be more and more common.

## Macro system

Grove will provide a macro system that ties in seamlessly with the
editor. Lisp macros are great, but cause growing pains when moving
from textual to visual source code. To offer the same convenience and
power as Grove's built-in facilities, Grove macros need to be fully
themable and augmentable by the user. Lisp macros are not expanded
until compile time, making it extremely difficult to reliably theme
and augment them at edit time. To do that, precise and intimate
knowledge is required about what part of the code calls a macro and
what the arguments do. That in turn requires name resolution while
keeping namespaces and lexical scoping in mind. Further, since Lisp is
not a purely functional language, one effectively has to write a
complete Lisp compiler to keep track of all the state and reliably
work with macros. And that's only for Lisp macros. To support macros
in any langauge, we would have to write a separate compiler for each
of them, as well as syntax extensions for most languages which don't
yet have macros.

Clearly there has to be a better way. Functional programming has shown
us that a program composed entirely of pure functions is easy to
evaluate, partially or fully, in a safe sandbox with predictable
results. Spreadsheet applications have shown us that pure functional
programming, despite the intricate theory, can be made accessible to
novices when it is presented visually in a live-manipulation
environment. Total functional programming prevents even more mistakes
by guaranteeing there are no infinite loops.

The Grove macro system will treat the combined group of syntax trees
of each source file in a project like one big spreadsheet. Any syntax
tree node will either have a fixed value (i.e. traditional, static
source code - almost all nodes will be like this) or compute its value
as a pure function of other nodes. Each of these functions will be
encapsulated in a macro. Each macro will be themable. For example, a
macro that takes a number as an argument could switch between an edit
box, a slider or a circular dial for inputting that number, according
to which theme is chosen in the editor. The Grove macro-expander will
compute the entire syntax forest by evaluating all syntax tree nodes,
guarding against loops, to produce source files in the traditional
syntax of the source languages. The result will be ready to feed to
traditonal compilers and build systems. Grove macro definitions will
be stored in a special file in the project's source directory, with
placeholders in the source files themselves at the site of each macro
call. The macro file can be committed to version control along with
the project's source files.

## Storing code in a database

In the far future, Grove may be able to store all of a project's
source code in a binary database and skip text files entirely. The
database format makes sense if it becomes a de facto standard such as
Git now is for version control. It makes less sense for Grove to have
its own format that only other Grove users can use. Code in a database
is a low priority, as we have plenty of more pressing concerns on our
plate.

## Name

*Grove* means a group of trees. A traditional source file is a static
encoding of a syntax tree. Hence a group of source files encodes a
group of trees. Grove aims to bring these trees into focus and blur
the syntactic noise in the background.
